---
title: UEFI-GPT Partitioning
excerpt: This post covers the basics of UEFI and GPT for disk partitioning.
categories:
  - UEFI
tags:
  - UEFI
  - GPT
  - Administration
---

When I was a teenager testing my system and installing new OSs I quickly learned
how to partition drives using the classic MBR scheme. As such, it took a bit of
research and trial & error to learn the new UEFI with GPT scheme. In this post
I focus on partitioning with UEFI-GPT, and do not delve into other aspects of
UEFI. This post is here to hopefully help those who got stuck as I did.

## Classic MBR Partitioning

Classically, hard drives would follow what is known as an MBR partitioning
scheme, a Master Boot Record (MBR) stored in the first 512 Bytes of the storage
device containing the boot loader (the first 440 Bytes) and the partitioning
table.

Under a BIOS system, when booting, the BIOS will load the MBR into memory and
the bootloader will run. This is done because the BIOS can't understand the
filesystems, thus the bootloader will be responsible for loading the operating
system(s) which reside on the disk partitions.

The *Primary* partition was the traditional type of partition, and the MBR
supported a maximum 4 of them. To counter this limitation, *Extended* partition
were introduced, allowing for 3 Primary and 1 Extended partition. Extended
partitions hold a potentially unlimited number of *Logical* partitions
(according to the standard) allowing us to bypass the limitation of 4 partitions
per disk.

As an example my Dual-Boot configuration, with Windows and Linux alongside,
would be the following:

| Partition Nbr | Type | Contents |
|--------------:|-----:|---------:|
| 1             | Primary | Windows Reserved |
| 2             | Primary | Windows          |
| 3             | Extended |  |
| 4             | Logical | Linux Boot Partition |
| 5             | Logical | Linux Swap Partition |
| 6             | Logical | Linux Root Partition |

## UEFI

UEFI is a new system which replaces the BIOS and it's boot process. When the
computer turns on, after the POST, instead of having the BIOS initialize
hardware, the UEFI firmware is loaded and takes over this initialization.

So what's different? In the next stage the firmware itself will read the boot
entries in its boot manager, which is located on a partition, since it is able
to read the file system.

UEFI typically (under Windows it is actually obliged to) uses a new partitioning
scheme: GUID Partition Table (GPT). Noticeable advantages of this scheme are
  * Support for disks larger than 2 TB (a maximum of 2 ZB)
  * Uses a unique GUID for the disk and Partition GUID for the partitions (all
of which are filesystem independent)
  * Contains space for 128 partitions with the possibility of extending the
space for more

With the noticeable advantages it provides, one must bare in mind that it is
new and works differently than MBR. The way you partition your drives now
changes slightly.

## UEFI Partitioning

UEFI-GPT requires that your first partition is a FAT 32 formatted partition
referred to as the *EFI System Partition (ESP)*. The UEFI firmware will launch
the UEFI bootloader and application from the ESP. This special partition can
hold multiple bootloader's and applications, and is shared for each system on
the drive (if for example you are dual booting Windows and Linux).

If partitioning with fdisk or gdisk ensure this partition is of type
*EFI System* or *EF00*

The rest of the partitions are up to you and your requirements.

For example, my partitioning for a UEFI-GPT Linux system is the following:

| Device | Size | Type |
|-------:|-----:|-----:|
| /dev/sda1 | 512M | EFI System Partition |
| /dev/sda2 | 2G | Linux Swap Partition |
| /dev/sda3 | 17.5G | Linux Root Partition |

Concerning Bootloaders, I personally use *Systemd-boot* as it is part of
systemd (already installed on my distribution) and I find it is easier than GRUB
for UEFI-GPT. As such the ESP is mounted to /boot and contains the kernel and
initramfs files. Systemd-boot auto-detects the Windows Loader and adds an option
for it, although the Linux systems need manual entries, but this is simple to do
(refer to my arch install post).
